>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, DECEMBER 13:
PROTESTS AGAINST KILLINGS BY
POLICE CONTINUE IN NEW YORK AND
WASHINGTON, D.C.; THE RISK AND
REWARD OF THE FALLING PRICE OF
OIL; A COVERT UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT HIP-HOP PROGRAM
INSIDE CUBA FAILS; AND IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, FROM MAIN
STREET DELANO, CALIFORNIA, A
HISTORIC DROUGHT HAS FARMERS
DESPERATE FOR WATER.
>> MARY MORTGAGED HER HOME,
PLUNKED DOWN ALMOST $200,000 TO
DRILL A WELL.
IT SAVED HER FARM.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
AS WE SPEAK, TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF DEMONSTRATORS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY ARE MARCHING IN THE SO-
CALLED DAY OF RESISTANCE,
PROTESTING THE KILLINGS BY
POLICE OF MICHAEL BROWN, ERIC
GARNER AND AKAI GURLEY.
IN NEW YORK AND IN MANY OTHER
CITIES, THOUSANDS JOINED IN
MOSTLY PEACEFUL DEMONSTRATIONS.
NEW YORK CITY PROTESTERS PLANNED
TO END THEIR MARCH IN FRONT OF
POLICE HEADQUARTERS.
ANOTHER PROTEST LED BY THE
REVEREND AL SHARPTON MARCHED ON
THE NATIONAL MALL IN WASHINGTON,
D.C. TODAY.
SHARPTON IS CALLING FOR CONGRESS
TO PASS LEGISLATION PUTTING
FEDERAL PROSECUTORS IN CHARGE OF
POLICE SHOOTING CASES.
INSIDE THE CAPITOL BUILDING THIS
EVENING, U.S. SENATORS PASSED A
FOUR-DAY SHORT-TERM SPENDING
BILL THAT EXTENDS THE DEBATE
OVER THE $1.1 TRILLION BUDGET
PACKAGE AND AVERTS A GOVERNMENT
SHUTDOWN, AT LEAST TILL
WEDNESDAY.
THE HOUSE NARROWLY APPROVED
THEIR VERSION OF THE DEAL
LAST THURSDAY.
BESIDES FUNDING THE MILITARY AND
FIGHTING EBOLA, THE BUDGET PLAN
ALSO CLEARS THE WAY FOR MUCH
LARGER CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS
FROM WEALTHY INDIVIDUAL DONORS
AND INCLUDES A CONTROVERSIAL
ROLLBACK ON BANK REGULATIONS PUT
IN PLACE AFTER THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS IN 2008.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS AGREED TO
ACCEPT THOSE CHANGES AND IS NOW
FACING CRITICISM ON THOSE ISSUES
FROM BOTH HOUSE DEMOCRATIC
LEADER NANCY PELOSI AND
DEMOCRATIC SENATOR ELIZABETH
WARREN.
ATTORNEY GENERAL ERIC HOLDER HAS
DECIDED NOT TO FORCE A "NEW YORK
TIMES" JOURNALIST TO REVEAL HIS
SOURCE IN A MAJOR C.I.A. LEAK
CASE.
FORMER C.I.A. OFFICIAL JEFFREY
STERLING IS ON TRIAL FOR LEAKING
CLASSIFIED INFORMATION TO
REPORTER JAMES RISEN ABOUT THE
AGENCY’S PLAN TO SABOTAGE IRAN’S
NUCLEAR ARMS PROGRAM.
ISIS EXTREMISTS SUCCEEDED IN
SHOOTING DOWN AN IRAQI MILITARY
HELICOPTER TODAY, KILLING BOTH
PILOTS ON BOARD.
IT IS AT LEAST THEIR THIRD
SUCCESSFUL ATTACK ON MILITARY
HELICOPTERS SINCE OCTOBER.
MEANWHILE, ISIS FIGHTERS HAVE
BEEN GETTING A VIRTUAL BOOST
FROM A TWITTER USER IN INDIA.
AN EXECUTIVE CONFESSED TO
TWEETING @shamiwitness FROM
BANGALORE.
HE BECAME ONE OF THE MOST
WIDELY-READ ISIS SUPPORTERS,
POSTING UPDATES ON THE GROUP’S
VICTORIES AND CALLING ON MUSLIMS
TO JOIN THE CAUSE.
THE TWITTER ACCOUNT HAS BEEN
SHUT DOWN.
IT’S BEEN A PARTICULARLY DEADLY
COUPLE OF DAYS IN AFGHANISTAN.
THIS AFTERNOON, A SUICIDE BOMBER
BLEW UP A BUS CARRYING AFGHAN
ARMY PERSONNEL IN KABUL, KILLING
SIX ONBOARD.
EARLIER THIS MORNING, TALIBAN
FIGHTERS KILLED A DOZEN SOLDIERS
WHO WERE CLEARING MINES IN
SOUTHERN AFGHANISTAN.
YESTERDAY, A ROADSIDE BOMB HIT A
CONVOY NEAR A RECENTLY CLOSED
U.S.-RUN PRISON IN BAGRAM,
REPORTEDLY KILLING TWO
AMERICANS.
ALSO IN THE MIDEAST, A FIGHT
OVER LIBYA’S MOST VITAL OIL
TERMINAL IS PITTING TWO FACTIONS
AGAINST EACH OTHER.
BOTH SIDES CLAIM THEY REPRESENT
THE COUNTRY’S REAL GOVERNMENT.
A FACTION OF TRIPOLI-BASED
FORCES CLASHED WITH RIVALS FROM
THE EASTERN CITY OF TOBRUK TO
GAIN CONTROL OF THE SIDRA OIL
TERMINAL TODAY.
TWO PEOPLE WERE KILLED.
THE FIGHT STOKES THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION’S CONCERNS OVER
MILITANT GROUPS TRAINING IN
REMOTE AREAS OF LIBYA.
A SOBERING DECISION BY LEADERS
IN SIERRA LEONE TODAY-- THE
GOVERNMENT IS BANNING PUBLIC
CHRISTMAS AND NEW YEAR’S
CELEBRATIONS, HOPING TO SLOW
DOWN THE SPREAD OF EBOLA.
SOLDIERS WILL PATROL THE
STREETS, BREAKING UP PUBLIC
GATHERINGS.
SIERRA LEONE IS FACING THE WORST
OF THE EBOLA OUTBREAK IN WEST
AFRICA, REPORTING MORE THAN
1,300 NEW CASES IN JUST THE PAST
THREE WEEKS.
>> Sreenivasan: WE’VE BEEN
FOLLOWING THE DRAMATIC DROP IN
OIL PRICES OVER THE LAST FEW
WEEKS, BUT THOSE PRICES ARE JUST
A SNAPSHOT OF A MUCH MORE
DRAMATIC DOWNWARD TREND.
OVER THE LAST YEAR, A BARREL OF
OIL WENT FROM $96.47 TO $67.18.
THAT’S A 30% PLUNGE.
SINCE MONDAY, THE PRICE PER
BARREL OF DOMESTIC SWEET CRUDE
DROPPED FROM $63.13 TO $54.25, A
14% SLIDE.
FOR CONSUMERS, THIS MIGHT SEEM
LIKE WELCOME NEWS, BUT, FOR WALL
STREET, THE NUMBERS TELL A
DIFFERENT STORY.
HERE TO HELP US MAKE SENSE THE
DOWNWARD TREND IS NICK TIMIRAOS
OF THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL,"
WHO’S JOINS US FROM WASHINGTON,
D.C.
SO THIS IS A GOOD THING FOR
CONSUMERS, THE PRICE OF GAS IS
DROPPING AT THE PUMP.
THEY FEEL LIKE THEY HAVE MORE
MONEY IN THEIR POCKETS, RIGHT?
>> YEAH, THAT’S ABSOLUTELY
RIGHT.
I MEAN, IN JUNE, U.S. CONSUMERS
WERE PAYING ON AVERAGE $3.68 A
GALLON FOR GAS.
NOW WE’RE DOWN BELOW $2.60.
SO THIS IS A SURPRISE WINDFALL
AND IT REALLY BENEFITS THE
MIDDLE CLASS BECAUSE THE MIDDLE
CLASS AND LOWER INCOME
HOUSEHOLDS SPEND A HIGHER SHARE
OF THEIR INCOME, AND GAS
ACCOUNTS FOR A HIGHER SHARE OF
THEIR SPENDING THAN IT DOES FOR
THE AVERAGE.
SO IT REALLY IS A MIDDLE CLASS
TAX CUT ON THE ORDER OF $125
BILLION A YEAR IF PRICES ARE
SUSTAINED AT THESE LEVELS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO IF PEOPLE
HAVE MORE MONEY IN THEIR POCKETS
AND THEY GO OUT AND PERHAPS THEY
DO A LITTLE BIT MORE HOLIDAY
SHOPPING OR THEY JUICE THE
ECONOMY UP A LITTLE BIT MORE,
WHAT’S HAPPENING TO WALL STREET?
WHY DOES WALL STREET START TO
TUMBLE EVEN THOUGH PEOPLE HAVE
MORE MONEY IN THEIR POCKETS?
>> WELL, BECAUSE, THIS HAS BEEN
A BIG SURPRISE.
A 45% DROP IN THE PRICE OF CRUDE
OIL SINCE JUNE, THAT’S GOING TO
CREATE A LOT OF VOLATILITY,
AND WALL STREET DOESN’T
NECESSARILY LIKE THAT.
ONE OF THE BIG REASONS OIL HAS
FALLEN IS BECAUSE OF A SLOW-DOWN
IN DEMAND IN EUROPE AND JAPAN
WHERE THERE ARE WORRIES ABOUT
DEFLATION.
AND THEN, OF COURSE, IN CHINA,
WHICH HAS BEEN A HUGE ECONOMIC
GROWTH STORY FOR THE PAST 15
YEARS.
SO THESE CONCERNS THAT THE REST
OF THE WORLD MIGHT BE SLOWING
DOWN, THAT’S WHAT’S REALLY
CAUSING SOME CONCERN ON WALL
STREET.
AND THEN YOU ALSO HAD SOME
TREMENDOUS ENERGY INVESTMENT IN
THE UNITED STATES BECAUSE A LOT
OF THE SURGE IN THE SUPPLY OF
OIL HAS BEEN BROUGHT ABOUT FROM
FRACKING IN NORTHICA DAKOTA AND
TEXAS, SO YOU’VE HAD A LOT OF
SMALL COMPANIES RAISE A LOT OF
DEBT FROM THE NEW FRACKING BOOM.
AND WITH OIL PRICES FALLING, IT
CALLS INTO QUESTION THE BUSINESS
PROSPECTS FOR SOME OF THOSE
COMPANIES.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE KIND
OF A TIPPING POINT OR BASEMENT
THAT IS NECESSARY FOR THE PRICE
TO BE AT FOR AN OIL COMPANY TO
SAY, "YOU KNOW WHAT, IT MAKES
SENSE TO ME TO DIG A HOLE IN THE
GROUND AND INVEST $1 MILLION TO
FIND ANOTHER WELL OR TO
EXTRACT OIL FROM ANOTHER WELL"?
>> YEAH, WE ARE TESTING THOSE
PRICES RIGHT NOW.
I MEAN, A FEW MONTHS AGO, WHEN
OIL WAS AT $80, PEOPLE SAID,
WELL, MAYBE $70 WOULD BE THE
BREAK-EVEN, MAYBE $60 A
BARREL WOULD BE THE BREAK-EVEN.
NOW WE’RE DOWN BELOW $60 A
BARREL.
SO, WE’RE GOING TO FIND OUT OVER
THE NEXT FEW MONTHS.
ALREADY YOU’RE SEEING DRILL WELL
COUNTS, THE NUMBER OF DRILLS IN
THE GROUND IN THE U.S., GOING
DOWN.
AND SO, IT IS GOING TO BE A TEST
HERE TO SEE AT WHAT PRICE WILL
INVESTMENT SLOW AND WILL
PRODUCTION SLOW FOR THESE NEW
FRACKERS ALONG THE MIDDLE
CONTINENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
>> Sreenivasan: AND AS A RIPPLE
EFFECT, WE’RE ALSO SEEING THE
RUSSIAN ECONOMY OR THE IRANIANS,
OTHER OIL PRODUCERS ARE UP IN
ARMS ABOUT THIS, RIGHT?
>> YEAH, I MEAN, THIS IS NOT
GOOD NEWS AT ALL FOR VENEZUELA.
NOT GOOD NEWS FOR VLADIMIR PUTIN
IN RUSSIA, BUT IT’S GREAT NEWS
FOR THE U.S.
EVEN THOUGH THE U.S. HAS HAD AN
ENERGY BOOM AND SO THERE ARE
MORE RISKS NOW TO A DROP IN OIL
PRICES THAN IN THE PAST FOR THE
UNITED STATES, THE REWARDS STILL
OUTWEIGH THOSE RISKS.
THIS IS STILL NET POSITIVE FOR
THE UNITED STATES’ ECONOMY
BECAUSE WE STILL ARE ON NET AN
IMPORTER OF OIL, SO WHEN OIL
PRICES GOES DOWN, THAT’S GOING
TO BE GREAT FOR CONSUMERS.
AND CONSUMERS REALLY, YOU
KNOW, THEY’VE BEEN HANGING IN
THERE DURING THIS SO-CALLED
ECONOMIC RECOVERY, BUT THEY
HAVEN’T BEEN FEELING GREAT, AND
NOW WE’RE BEGINNING TO SEE
BETTER CONSUMER CONFIDENCE
NUMBERS.
RETAIL SALES FIGURES THIS WEEK
REPORTED FOR THE MONTH OF
NOVEMBER WERE GREAT, SO THERE’S
A LOT OF OPTIMISM NOW AND
AND THERE’S A LOT OF U.S.
BUSINESSES THAT BENEFIT, FRANKLY
FROM THIS-- AIRLINES, TRUCKING
COMPANIES.
SO WE SHOULD BEGIN TO SEE BETTER
PROSPECTS FOR U.S. GROWTH HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, NICK
TIMIRAOS FROM THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL" JOINING US FROM
WASHINGTON, D.C., THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANKS, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE LAST 24
HOURS, NORTHERN CALIFORNIA HAS
BEEN HIT HARD BY A MASSIVE STORM
THAT POUNDED THE STATE WITH HIGH
WINDS AND TORRENTIAL RAIN.
THE DOWNPOURS TRIGGERED
FLOODING, MUDSLIDES, PROPERTY
DAMAGE AND POWER OUTAGES.
BUT MUCH OF THE RAIN FROM THESE
STORMS DIDN’T REACH THE CENTRAL
VALLEY, WHERE IT’S DESPERATELY
NEEDED.
THIS PAST YEAR, NEARLY HALF A
MILLION ACRES OF FARMLAND THERE
HAVE BEEN TAKEN OUT OF
PRODUCTION, 17,000 JOBS
VANISHED, AND THE STATE HAS
SUFFERED $2.2 BILLION IN
DROUGHT-RELATED LOSSES.
AND AS YOU’LL SEE IN TONIGHT’S
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, ONE CITY IS
DOING ITS BEST TO COPE.
THIS IS THE FIRST INSTALLMENT IN
OUR SERIES OF REPORTS FROM MAIN
STREETS ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
JOHN LARSON REPORTS FROM MAIN
STREET, DELANO, CALIFORNIA.
>> IT’S GOING TO BE REALLY HARD
FOR THE BUSINESSES HERE ON MAIN
STREET TO SURVIVE IF IT DOESN’T
PICK UP.
>> Reporter: ALL ALONG MAIN
STREET IN DELANO, CALIFORNIA,
BUSINESSES CAN FEEL IT: THE
DROUGHT.
AT 1111 MAIN STREET, SUSANA
GARCIA SAYS IT’S SIMPLE.
>> A LOT OF PEOPLE NOT WORKING.
A LOT OF PEOPLE ONLY WORKING,
LIKE, A FEW HOURS, BUT THEY’RE
NOT WORKING ENOUGH SO THEY’RE
NOT SPENDING MONEY.
>> WE NEED THAT WATER SO THERE
CAN BE A LOT MORE FARM WORK FOR
EVERYBODY SO THEY CAN COME AND
SHOP AND DO WHAT THEY GOT TO DO
HERE.
>> Reporter: AT CHALIA’S
BARBERSHOP AT 916 MAIN, THERE’S
TALK OF WILD BEARS WANDERING IN
FROM THE HILLS.
>> THE BEAR WAS EVENTUALLY TAKEN
OUT AND PUT INTO THE BACK OF A
WILDLIFE TRUCK.
>> I GUESS THEY’RE LOOKING FOR
FOOD.
THERE’S NO WATER SOURCE OR
NOTHING, SO THE BEARS COMING
INTO THE CITY.
>> Reporter: LEIAS SERVIN
WORRIES THE DROUGHT WILL COST
HIS PARENTS, WHO WORK IN THE
FIELDS AND CAN’T AFFORD TO LOSE
THE HOURS.
HOW ARE THEY GETTING BY?
>> WELL, THEY HAVE... I GUESS
YOU HAVE TO MAKE IT WORK, BUT,
YEAH, IT’S HARD GETTING BY WHEN
THEY ARE CUTTING YOU SHORT.
I MEAN, IT’S A COUPLE OF
PAYCHECKS LESS THAT YOU GET.
>> Reporter: DELANO’S MAIN
STREET SITS AT THE SOUTHERN END
OF CALIFORNIA’S CENTRAL VALLEY,
THE RICHEST AGRICULTURAL VALLEY
IN THE WORLD.
THE VALLEY SUPPLIES 25% OF ALL
THE FOOD EATEN IN THE UNITED
STATES, AND YET, ALL AROUND
DELANO, THE DROUGHT HAS
ALREADY COST THOUSANDS OF JOBS,
ESPECIALLY IN THE FIELDS.
THIS GRAPE VINEYARD IS 23 MILES
FROM DELANO’S MAIN STREET.
CREW BOSS SONIA ROBLES, STILL
WEARING THE PROTECTIVE SUN MASK
THAT SHE WEARS IN THE FIELD,
SAYS SHE’S HAD TO TURN AWAY
PEOPLE LOOKING FOR WORK.
>> I WISH WE COULD HAVE WORK FOR
THEM, BUT, I MEAN, WE COULDN’T.
>> Reporter: WHEN THE
CONGREGATION AT UNITED FIRST
METHODIST CHURCH, JUST A BLOCK
OFF MAIN STREET, SHARED THEIR
PRAYERS ON THIS SUNDAY, A 24-
YEAR-OLD COWBOY OFFERED THIS:
>> WE ASK, LORD, THAT WE RECEIVE
MORE RAIN THIS WINTER.
A LOT OF GOOD, JUICY STORMS,
LORD.
>> Reporter: MATT HUFF WORKS ON
A CATTLE RANCH 16 MILES FROM
DELANO’S MAIN STREET.
>> WELL, I KNOW WE NEED RAIN.
WE CAN’T MAKE IT RAIN OURSELVES,
BUT WE CAN DEFINITELY GIVE IT TO
GOD.
IT’S ALL YOU CAN DO RIGHT ABOUT
NOW.
>> Reporter: WHILE IT MAY BE
DIFFICULT TO APPRECIATE JUST HOW
MUCH THE DROUGHT IS CHANGING THE
VALLEY, LISTEN TO MATT AS HE
DRIVES OUT WITH THE EVENING
FEED.
>> I FIRST CAME HERE ABOUT FIVE
YEARS AGO, AND THE GRASS WAS AT
LEAST SHOULDER HEIGHT.
EVERY YEAR THAT WE’VE HAD A
DROUGHT, THE FIELDS REMAIN BALD,
JUST PURE DIRT.
WE USED TO HAVE DANDELIONS OUT
IN THE FIELD THAT WERE TALLER
THAN ME.
THAT YOU CAN FEED A HERD OF
COWS WITH.
THIS, YOU CAN’T.
>> Reporter: THE HERD USED TO
NUMBER 200, BUT WHEN THE DROUGHT
HIT, THE PASTURES BEGAN DYING.
THE RANCH OWNER BEGAN BUYING HAY
TO FEED THE HERD.
AS THE DROUGHT CONTINUED, THE
OWNER WAS FORCED TO BEGIN
SELLING OFF THE HERD YOU SEE UP
AHEAD.
COW BY COW, THE HERD DWINDLED TO
A 100 AND THEN TO LESS THAN 50.
HE ALSO SOLD HIS ONLY BULL, AND
WITH IT MUCH OF THE HERD’S
FUTURE.
BUT THE BIGGER STORY, THE REASON
WE’VE COME TO DELANO IS WHAT’S
HAPPENING ALL AROUND THE RANCH.
THE CALIFORNIA DROUGHT IS
ENTERING ITS FOURTH STRAIGHT
YEAR, A DROUGHT SOME FEAR COULD
BECOME THE MOST COSTLY IN THE
HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN WEST.
>> YOU GOT GOOD YEARS AND BAD
YEARS.
THIS IS... I CALL IT "WORST
YEARS."
THIS IS REALLY BAD.
>> Reporter: MATT’S BOSS, RANCH
OWNER JESSE REVILLA, SAYS
DESPITE HIS BEST EFFORTS THE
REMAINING HERD IS LOSING WEIGHT,
BUT FEEDING THEM IS BREAKING
HIM.
HOW LONG CAN YOU KEEP THAT UP?
>> WELL, THAT MEANS I GOT TO GO
SELL SOME MORE COWS.
I’VE GOT TO SELL MORE CATTLE SO
I CAN BUY MORE HAY.
>> Reporter: SO, THE HERD GETS
SMALLER AND SMALLER.
>> AND I’M GETTING POORER AND
POORER.
>> Reporter: CALIFORNIA
RESERVOIRS, ONCE PICTURES OF
ABUNDANCE, ARE MORE ALARMING
THAN REASSURING.
THIS YEAR, THE HOTTEST EVER
RECORDED IN CALIFORNIA, WATER
LEVELS FELL SO LOW THAT
AUTHORITIES HAD TO CUT OFF WATER
TO MOST FARMERS.
MEANING, FARMERS HAD TO USE WELL
WATER OR LOSE EVERYTHING.
IF YOU DIDN’T HAVE A WELL, WHAT
WOULD HAVE HAPPENED TO YOUR
TREES?
>> WELL, THEY WOULD BE HALF DEAD
BY NOW.
>> Reporter: TWO MILES FROM MAIN
STREET, MARY ANDREAS JOINED
HUNDREDS OF FARMERS NOW DRILLING
FOR WATER.
MARY GROWS 84 ACRES OF ALMONDS.
HER TREES REQUIRE YEAR-ROUND
WATER TO STAY ALIVE.
SIX MONTHS BEFORE HER WATER
ALLOTMENT WAS CUT OFF, MARY
MORTGAGED HER HOME, PLUNKED DOWN
ALMOST $200,000 TO DRILL A WELL.
IT SAVED HER FARM.
HOW HARD WAS THAT DECISION?
>> IT WASN’T HARD BECAUSE WE HAD
ALREADY INVESTED SO MUCH.
WE CAN’T STOP NOW.
WE DON’T KNOW WHAT’S GOING TO
HAPPEN NEXT YEAR OR THE OTHER,
BUT WE HAVE TO KEEP GOING
FORWARD BECAUSE WE GOT
EVERYTHING, OUR WHOLE LIFE,
INVESTED IN THIS 84 ACRES.
>> Reporter: WHICH IS WHY
FARMERS LIKE MARY WHO CAN AFFORD
IT ARE DRILLING MORE WELLS THAN
EVER.
DRILLING CREWS ARE ARRIVING FROM
ACROSS THE WEST, ADDING TO LOCAL
DRILLERS WHO CAN’T KEEP UP WITH
THE DEMAND.
IF WE WANT TO DRILL A WELL IN
OUR FARM, HOW SOON COULD YOU DO
IT?
>> WE’RE ANYWHERE FROM EIGHT
MONTHS TO A YEAR AND A HALF
BEHIND.
>> Reporter: BUT MORE WORRISOME
IS THAT SO MUCH WATER IS BEING
PUMPED FROM UNDERGROUND TO
REPLACE WATER LOST IN THIS
DROUGHT THAT FEW PEOPLE BELIEVE
IT CAN BE SUSTAINED.
WELLS ARE GOING DRY, AND
DRILLERS ARE FORCED TO GO DEEPER
TO FIND WATER.
THIS WELL, LOCATED 16 MILES FROM
MAIN STREET, IS HEADED DOWN
1,600 FEET, 350 FEET DEEPER THAN
THE EMPIRE STATE BUILDING IS
HIGH.
TO WHAT EXTENT DO YOU FEEL LIKE
WE CAN ONLY PUNCH SO MANY HOLES
AND PULL OUT SO MUCH WATER
BEFORE WE REALLY START SEEING
HUGE PROBLEMS?
>> WELL, I MEAN, WE’RE TO THAT
STAGE RIGHT NOW, I THINK,
BECAUSE THE DEEPER YOU GO ON
SOME OF THIS, YOU’RE LOSING OUT
ON WATER QUALITY, TOO.
YOU’RE GOING TO GET DOWN SO DEEP
AND THE WATER’S GOING TO START
GETTING SALTY ON YOU.
>> SO THIS GROVE HAS NOT HAD
WATER ON IT IN A WHOLE YEAR.
>> Reporter: RANDY WELDON IS A
LOCAL GROWER.
HE SHOWED US HOW FARMERS WHO
COULD NOT AFFORD TO DRILL WELLS
HELPLESSLY WATCHED THEIR
ORCHARDS DIE.
THESE ORANGE TREES ARE DEAD, AND
THERE ARE THOUSANDS JUST LIKE
THEM NOT FAR FROM DELANO’S MAIN
STREET.
>> IT’S HEARTBREAKING.
IN A LOT OF CASES, THE FARMERS
HAVE THEIR HEART AND SOUL INTO
THIS LAND, AND IT’S LIKE LOSING
A PART OF YOUR FAMILY, YOU KNOW.
AND ECONOMICALLY, IT’S
DISASTROUS.
>> Reporter: IN CALIFORNIA,
WATER IS CONSIDERED A PROPERTY
RIGHT, SO FARMERS ARE FREE TO
DRILL AS MUCH AS THEY WANT, AS
LONG AS ITS ON THEIR OWN
PROPERTY.
ALL THEY NEED IS A PERMIT.
BUT NO ONE KNOWS HOW MUCH WATER
FARMERS ARE PULLING FROM THE
UNDERGROUND AQUIFER-- THAT’S THE
NATURAL RESERVOIR ACCUMULATED
OVER THOUSANDS OF YEARS FROM
RAIN AND SNOW-- AND NO ONE KNOWS
HOW MUCH WATER IS LEFT.
IF AN AQUIFER IS LIKE A SAVINGS
ACCOUNT, THIS IS A RUN ON THE
BANK, A RACE TO THE BOTTOM.
>> IT’S BEEN OVER 50 YEARS SINCE
WE BUILT THE STATE WATER
PROJECT.
>> Reporter: AT THE URGING OF
GOVERNOR JERRY BROWN,
CALIFORNIA VOTERS THIS YEAR
AGREED THEY HAD TO BE BETTER
PREPARED FOR A DROUGHT, SO THEY
PASSED A $7.5 BILLION BOND FOR
BUILDING WATER STORAGE
FACILITIES AND WATER RECYCLING
PROJECTS.
THIS ESCALATING THIRST FOR WATER
HAS ALSO LED TO SOME SURPRISING
PARTNERSHIPS.
FOR EXAMPLE, 21 MILLION GALLONS
OF WATER EVERY DAY FLOW INTO THE
CAWELO RESERVOIR, WATER HELPING
SAVE 90 DESPERATE FARMERS SOUTH
OF DELANO.
THE WATER COMES FROM-- OF ALL
PLACES-- HERE.
THIS IS CHEVRON’S KERN RIVER OIL
FIELD JUST 35 MILES SOUTH OF
DELANO’S MAIN STREET.
IT’S THE THIRD LARGEST OIL
PRODUCING FIELD IN THE STATE,
MORE THAN 70,000 BARRELS PER
DAY.
BUT IN THE PROCESS OF
RETRIEVING THE OIL, CHEVRON
PULLS UP MORE WATER, A LOT MORE.
THE WATER IS USED FOR STEAM TO
HELP RECOVER THE OIL
UNDERGROUND AND THEN SEPARATED
FROM THE OIL, CLEANED AND PUMPED
THROUGH PIPELINES TO THE
RESERVOIR AND THE WAITING
FARMERS.
>> FOR EVERY TEN BARRELS OF
FLUID THAT WE PRODUCED FROM KERN
RIVER FIELD, NINE OF THOSE ARE
WATER.
ONE BARREL OF OIL TO NINE
BARRELS OF WATER.
SO, WE’RE ALMOST LIKE A WATER
COMPANY THAT HAPPENS TO SKIM
OIL.
>> Reporter: BACK ON DELANO’S
MAIN STREET, THE DROUGHT CAN BE
FELT IN EVERY LOST SALE AND
EVERY CASH REGISTER.
NO ONE, OF COURSE, KNOWS WHEN
THE DROUGHT WILL END.
ONLY THAT UNTIL IT DOES, LIFE IN
AND AROUND DELANO FEELS HARDER,
FURTHER BEYOND THEIR CONTROL
THAN THEY’D LIKE, AND THAT THE
THINGS THEY HOLD DEAR HERE IN
THIS RICH VALLEY ARE SUDDENLY IN
PLAY.
>> IT’S GETTING HARDER AND
HARDER AND HARDER TO BE A
RANCHER.
WE NEED THE RAIN.
EVERYONE DOES.
>> IF WE DON’T GET RAIN THIS
YEAR, WE’RE IN FOR SOME REALLY
BAD TIMES.
>> I GUESS WE’RE STILL HERE
BECAUSE THIS IS OUR LIFE, AND
WE’RE HERE BECAUSE WE WANT TO
KEEP FARMING AS LONG AS WE
POSSIBLY CAN.
>> Sreenivasan: SEE BEFORE-AND-
AFTER PHOTOS OF SITES MOST
IMPACTED BY CALIFORNIA’S
HISTORIC DROUGHT.
VISIT newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS WEEK, THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS REVEALED THAT
THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
ATTEMPTED AND FAILED TO CO-OPT
THE HIP-HOP SCENE IN CUBA TO
"SPARK A YOUTH MOVEMENT AGAINST
THE GOVERNMENT."
THIS FAILURE COMES ON THE HEELS
OF TWO OTHERS ALSO REPORTED BY
THE A.P.-- ONE TO CREATE A FAKE
"CUBAN TWITTER" AND THE OTHER TO
SEND YOUNG PEOPLE INTO CUBA TO
RECRUIT ACTIVISTS.
HERE TO HELP US MAKE SENSE OF
THIS STORY IS TRISH WILSON OF
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS, WHO JOINS
ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON, D.C.
SO, TRISH, WHAT WAS THIS
PROGRAM?
HOW DID IT WORK?
>> WELL, THE INTENT WAS TO
RADICALIZE THE CUBAN PEOPLE TO
CHALLENGE THEIR OWN GOVERNMENT.
AND THE WAY IT WORKED WAS THAT
U.S.A.I.D. CONTRACTORS
INFILTRATED THE HIP-HOP SCENE
AND WERE TRYING TO GENERATE A
FAN BASE THAT WOULD SPEAK OUT
AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT AND
CHALLENGE IT AND ULTIMATELY LEAD
THEM TO DEMOCRATIC REFORMS.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DID THEY
SORT OF TRY TO FOMENT MORE
DISSENT?
WHO DID THEY HAVE ON THE GROUND?
>> WELL, U.S.A.I.D. ACTIVITIES
IN CUBA ARE ILLEGAL THERE, AND
PEOPLE WHO OPERATE OR
PARTICIPATE IN THOSE THOSE
PROGRAMS CAN GO TO JAIL.
SO WHAT THE U.S.A.I.D.
CONTRACTORS DID IS, THEY WENT TO
SERBIA, WHERE THEY RECRUITED TWO
SERBIAN MUSIC PROMOTERS TO HELP
THEM IN CUBA.
THE REASON WHY THEY THOUGHT THIS
WOULD WORK WAS BECAUSE, IN
2000, IT WAS A YOUTH MOVEMENT
AND STUDENT PROTEST CONCERTS IN
SERBIA THAT HELPED BRING DOWN
THE PRESIDENCY OF SLOBODAN
MIL0SEVIC.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, THERE WAS
ALREADY A COMMUNITY THERE, THERE
WAS ALREADY CITIZEN SPEECH
AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT THAT WAS
HAPPENING?
>> OH, YES.
THE HIP-HOP SCENE WAS PRETTY
MUCH AT ITS PEAK AT THAT TIME.
THE ARTISTS WERE SPEAKING OUT
AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT.
IT WAS... IT TOOK A LOT OF
PEOPLE, I THINK, BY SURPRISE TO
REALIZE HOW MUCH DISSENT WAS
ALLOWED IN CUBA AT THE TIME.
BUT THE ARTISTS THAT U.S.A.I.D.
WAS FOCUSING ON WERE CALLED LOS
ALDEANOS, AND THEY HAD A SONG
CALLED "RAP IS WAR."
>> Sreenivasan: AND SO, WHERE
DID THIS GO WRONG?
HOW DID THE CUBAN GOVERNMENT
FIND OUT?
WHAT WERE THE REPERCUSSIONS OF
THIS PROGRAM?
>> WELL, THE PEOPLE THAT WERE
PART OF THE PROGRAM KEPT GETTING
DETAINED BY THE CUBAN OFFICIALS,
WHO WOULD GO THROUGH THEIR
COMPUTERS AND THEIR THUMB DRIVES
AND WERE CONSTANTLY TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT WAS GOING ON.
THE U.S.A.I.D. CONTRACTORS
CONTINUED TO GO THROUGH CUSTOMS
WITH THEIR COMPUTERS, AND THEY
WERE DETAINED SO MANY TIMES THAT
THE CUBANS ULTIMATELY FIGURED IT
OUT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND SO, WHAT
HAPPENED AS A RESULT, SAY, TO
THE BAND MEMBERS?
>> WELL, ONE OF THE KEY THINGS
THAT HAPPENED IS THAT THERE WAS
AN INDEPENDENT MUSIC CONCERT
FESTIVAL IN CUBA AT THE TIME.
AND AT THE CONCERT IN 2010, THE
LOS ALDEANOS PERFORMED BEFORE A
BIG CROWD OF 15,000, THE BIGGEST
CROWD EVER,
BUT AFTERWARDS, THE CUBANS
FIGURED OUT THAT THE CONCERT WAS
ACTUALLY FUNDED BY U.S.A.I.D.,
SO THEY TOOK IT OVER AND THAT
ENDED THE BIG, INDEPENDENT MUSIC
FESTIVAL THAT EXISTED ON THE
ISLAND AT THE TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: MOST PEOPLE IN
THE AUDIENCE ARE ALSO GOING TO
WONDER WHAT DOES U.S.A.I.D. HAVE
TO DO WITH ANY OF THIS?
I MEAN, WHEN WE THINK OF
U.S.A.I.D., USUALLY WE’RE
THINKING OF BAGS OF FOODS IN
COUNTRIES THAT ARE DESPERATE
FOR FOOD.
HOW DOES THIS LINE UP WITH THE
MISSION?
>> WELL, BEYOND ITS
HUMANITARIAN MISSION, PART OF
U.S.A.I.D.’S MISSION IS TO
PROMOTE DEMOCRACY EFFORTS AROUND
THE WORLD, SO THIS IS ONE OF
THOSE PRO-DEMOCRACY EFFORTS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, TRISH
WILSON JOINING US FROM
WASHINGTON, D.C. FROM THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBSNEWSHOUR
WEEKEND, SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
"VIEWERS LIKE YOU."
WE BEGIN WITH YOUR COMMENTS ON
THE CONVERSATION WE HAD ABOUT
STUDENT LOANS AND THE NEW
OPTIONS THAT ALLOW BORROWERS TO
MODIFY THE TERMS OF THEIR LOANS.
PANHEAD20 WROTE: "WHEN THE
GOVERNMENT GIVES BILLIONS TO THE
BANKSTERS AT 0% INTEREST AND
THEN CHARGES STRUGGLING STUDENTS
4%-PLUS THAT WILL HAUNT THEM
FOR THE REST OF THEIR LIVES,
WELCOME TO INDENTURED SERVITUDE.
:("
CHRISTOPHER GERSTLE COMMENTED:
"IF COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
HAVE TO EDUCATE MORE THAN TWICE
THE NUMBER OF STUDENTS THEY ONCE
DID BUT HAVE LESS MONEY TO DO
IT, WHAT DO YOU THINK IS GOING
TO HAPPEN?
SCHOOLS EITHER HAVE TO RAISE
MORE CAPITAL FROM PRIVATE
SOURCES OR RAISE TUITION."
SCOTT TUCKER TOOK A BROADER
VIEW:
"THE AMERICAN COLLEGE DEGREE HAS
BEEN DIMINISHED BY LOWER
STANDARDS FOR ACHIEVEMENT AND
THE FALSE NARRATIVE THAT NO ONE
CAN MAKE IT WITHOUT ONE.
EUROPEAN COUNTRIES LIKE GERMANY
FOR EXAMPLE, PROVIDE FREE
COLLEGE EDUCATION TO ANYONE WHO
PROVES THEY’RE GENUINELY
INTERESTED AND THEIR INTENT IS
WORTHY OF THE DEGREE.
WE ARE BEING OUTPACED BY SUCH
NATIONS AS THEY SEEM TO VALUE
QUALITY OVER QUANTITY."
AND JOHN FRAZIER HAD THE END IN
SIGHT:
"IN TWO MONTHS, MAKING THE LAST
PAYMENT AFTER MY SON GRADUATED
12 YEARS AGO."
COMMENTS ABOUT OUR SEGMENT ON A
LAWSUIT IN CALIFORNIA THAT
CHALLENGED CURRENT TEACHER
TENURE REGULATIONS IN THAT STATE
WERE MOSTLY DIVIDED INTO TWO
CAMPS.
PURP CHITEN WROTE:
"NOBODY IS GOING TO WANT TO GO
INTO THE FIELD AND UNDERGO THE
’TORTURE’ AND ’SLAVE LABOR’ OF
BEING A TEACHER IF THERE IS NO
PROTECTION FOR THEM SUCH AS
TENURE."
AND THERE WAS THIS FROM
BLAKENAUSTIN:
"SENIORITY AND QUALITY HAVE VERY
LITTLE IN COMMON.
SENIORITY SHOULD NOT LEAD TO
TENURE.
SENIORITY SHOULD NOT BE THE
DOMINANT FACTOR IN SETTING
SALARIES."
AS ALWAYS, YOU CAN LEAVE
YOUR COMMENTS ONLINE AT
newshour.pbs.org, OR TWEET US
BACK @newshour, OR LEAVE IT FOR
US ON OUR FACEBOOK PAGE.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY TONIGHT,
THE SENATE HAS PASSED A FOUR-DAY
SPENDING BILL TO GIVE THEM MORE
TIME TO DEBATE A $1.1 TRILLION
BUDGET PACKAGE.
SENATE MAJORITY LEADER HARRY
REID IS ALSO TRYING TO PUSH
THROUGH SOME OF THE PRESIDENT’S
MOST CONTESTED NOMINEES BEFORE
REPUBLICANS TAKE CONTROL IN
JANUARY.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS IS
REPORTING THAT FOR THE SECOND
TIME THIS YEAR, A RUSSIAN
MILITARY AIRCRAFT REPORTEDLY
TURNED OFF ITS TRANSPONDERS AND
NEARLY COLLIDED WITH A PASSENGER
JET OVER SWEDEN.
THE RUSSIAN PLANE WAS APPARENTLY
TRYING TO AVOID COMMERCIAL
RADAR.
THAT’S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I’M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.